How did ACT UP respond to this information? What did they decide to do? They essentially
accepted it and put it on their agenda. That was it. It was on the agenda. What were the drugs
that people wanted to have studied? I can’t remember all the drugs, but there were at least five
or six drugs. They all have the letters and stuff. I can remember the AL very clearly, because I
helped distribute it. But, the others – Did any of them turn out to be valuable? No, I don’t
think so. But, some of them were cancer drugs, too. They were not in the nucleoside area. They
were not that type of a drug, but they were cancer drugs. Where did you fit in, in ACT UP? Did
you get into a committee? Or, did you start a committee? Yeah, I started a committee. It was
going to these meetings. It wasn’t just going to ACT UP. There were meetings after ACT UP, after
the general meeting. So, Monday night, after the general meeting? Right, right. There were
meetings at people’s houses. I can’t remember his name – Herbert – you probably know who I mean
– I don’t know – you’re probably interviewing him. Herb – anyway, he made his house available,
and people went to his house, and we all discussed what we should do next, with respect to
treatment. And, actually – I can’t remember the names – a little guy and I – we decided we
needed a treatment committee, and he said, no, we need treatment and we need data. So, it became
the Treatment Data Committee. So, we formed the committee and that was – Who were some of the
people on the Treatment and Data Committee? Jim Eigo, of course, was in it. But, he came a
little later. He was at Herb’s house. He was there. And, there were a number of other people. I
can’t remember their names at this point. David Kirschenbaum was the other. And so, we formed a
committee, and it met every week, and we worked on it. I worked on it all day long, actually. We
were calling drug companies and things like that – finding out, here’s a drug, let’s find out
where it is, how can we get it? And, so forth. So, we had a list of drugs that we were working
on – the DHPG. Then, we had an action in Washington and so forth. What was the action? The
action for DHPG was at a hearing. Let’s go through the whole trajectory, so people can
understand how the whole process worked in ACT UP. So, first you identified DHPG, and, were
there any trials for it? I would say there were trials for it, but they probably were very
small. Let’s say what the drug was for, also. It’s for CMV retinitis. So the idea is, number
one, it should be an approved drug. Before we even had this Treatment and Data Committee, we had
had sessions where we started to learn what the FDA was all about. And, I can remember a group
of us trying to teach one another what the FDA is about, and how the FDA works to approve drugs.
That was a very key part of the whole thing. It wasn’t only the testing of drugs, the clinical
trials – but how these drugs would be approved, and would they be approved in a timely way?
Because they were not being approved in a timely way. And, DHPG was one of the drugs. So, you
felt confident that this was a drug that definitely merited approval. Oh yeah, everyone said
that it definitely merited approval. And what held it up? What was the problem? It was the whole
process of the FDA. That they had no – It was the bureaucracy of the review. On the application
they have tons of paper they have to go through, and so forth. They have committees that will
review the data and so forth. An anti-viral committee would review it. It would have to be put
on a calendar. They would have to look at the data, make presentations. But, the whole process
was very slow. And, the drug companies agreed, everything was slow. They agreed too, so they had
an ally in us. Who was the company? I can’t remember. I guess it was – Glaxo? Burroughs
Wellcome? I’m not certain. So what would be the process? So, first you would go to the FDA?
Because there was another new, purine type compound. So, first did you go to the FDA and say
look, this is ridiculous, how can you speed this up? Well, there was contact with the – Who were
the people there that you were in contact with? Ellen Cooper, and different people. What was
their response? They met and we had to put pressure on them. There was constant pressure on
them. It was not only us in ACT UP New York. There were other people putting pressure on them,
too. So, this action was part of that pressure? Yeah, that was at a meeting – at an advisory
committee meeting – and I can remember we had clocks – made clocks. Paper clocks or cardboard
clocks, to show that the time was going by and so forth. So, after you disrupted a meeting at
FDA about DHPG – had you ever done anything like that before in your life? No, but everybody was
gung-ho on doing it. Did you feel scared? No. A little. Not much. Were they angry? No. They were
somewhat I would say stunned. So, how long after that did DHPG get released? I really don’t know
the exact time, but it was made available and some key people got the drug. They were key –
Michael Callen – a number that I knew. So, Michael Callen’s sight was saved – It wasn’t Michael
Callen, exactly, but a friend of his, who had CMV retinitis. So, were you involved in ACT UP’s
restructuring of the FDA approval system? The parallel track system? Can you tell us a little
bit about who thought of that, and how it was implemented? What it was? I’ve talked about it so
much. I can’t figure out right now. I talked about it – I can remember talking about parallel
track, but right now, I can’t think – You can’t remember what it was? It’s getting the one drug
– I can’t remember how it went, at this point. Was that Jim Eigo’s project? Yeah. He talked
about it quite a bit. We all talked about it. Why did ACT UP have to think of a way for the FDA
to be more effective? How come the FDA couldn’t deal with it? They had their bureaucracy – the
way they did things, how they got doctors. I mean, you know – within their ranks, there – they
came from major medical centers. They weren’t looking to make the system work better. That
wasn’t their job, number one. They would say, that’s somebody else’s job. This is what developed
for them. They didn’t think of making the system more effective, I don’t think. How do you think
that people in ACT UP got to the point, where they realized that they had to and could be the
people who were going to restructure the FDA? I don’t think they thought that they were doing
this, but they knew that they had to put pressure on the FDA and change the FDA – how they did
business, because the drug development system was just taking too long. There was too much
bureaucracy. Trials couldn’t be done, because of the FDA. Drugs couldn’t be approved and gotten
by the public or whatever because of this long process. The compassionate use was not an
effective way to get drugs. Was compassionate use another ACT UP – Because the compassionate use
– yeah. The whole idea of getting the drugs before they were approved and expanding them to
communities, before the exact approval date, that they knew the drugs were working and the
expanded access thing. And do you remember who thought of that? It’s hard to say one person,
because we were all working on this together, and we just said, well, this is what we have to
do. We have to get these drugs sooner. They have to be available to people – people who have no
other choices. They have to be available. So, it just sort of mushroomed and developed. I can’t
remember the exact person who had this idea or that idea, because we were working on various
aspects of it. We knew FDA was key. We knew that NIAID was key. And, there were people who were
putting a lot of energy in each one of these segments of the puzzle. Now, when ACT UP did its
famous action at the FDA, did you participate in that? Yeah. What were the demands? Well, it’s a
long time ago, and I can’t remember the demands. Was it related to compassionate use and
parallel track? Or, were they already in place? It wasn’t one issue. It was many issues. We made
a flyer – and it was many issues. I mean, we put down a number of issues. Did you have an
affinity group with that action? Yeah. What was it? I can’t remember. Did you get arrested? No,
I didn’t get arrested. Do you remember anything about that action? The buses, a lot of people
there, people on top of the – someone having a banner on top of the projection of the building.
Iris, how much of your life was involved with this? Quite a bit. Ask your husband? Yeah. Would
you say every day? Yeah, every day. Every day, because I was either making calls – initially,
there was no Internet or anything, so you had to make calls to find out about different drugs,
drug companies, whatever. People would call sometimes, find out, I need this drug or whatever.
People with AIDS would call you? Yeah. And ask for advice? Yeah, that was going on, yeah. And
did you feel comfortable giving advice? They were trying to get drugs, or – what the problem was
with getting drugs. Actually, I was even contacted during the TB, by a patient who needed –
because drugs were cut off, for some reason. They couldn’t get the drugs anymore, because the
FDA banned the drugs, because they were contaminated or whatever, or they didn’t like where the
drugs were coming from – for TB, certain TB drugs were unavailable. So, I helped a woman get
drugs from Canada. She needed streptomycin – a very simple drug – one of the first drugs she
needed. She only had one lung, and she needed this drug. It was part of her cocktail, and it was
no longer available in this country. What did you friends and family think? That you were
spending all your time on AIDS? Well, I had new friends, that’s all. Did your relationships
change because of the work you were doing? No, I don’t think they changed. Maybe. I would have
been doing something else, if I wasn’t doing this. Were you talking about AIDS all the time –
like, if you were getting together with your family, were you talking about AIDS? No. That was a
time when I wouldn’t talk about AIDS that much. I would say what I was doing, but it wasn’t a
long, drawn out thing. So, what about all these gay men? All these gay people that you’re
spending every single day with – had you ever had gay people in your life, to that extent
before? No. Had you had any gay friends at all? Not that I know of, no. It was very closeted, so
it was very hard to say whether you did have a gay friend or not. So, how did that affect you?
What did you think about that, at the time? I sort of just accepted it, that’s it. I said, this
is what I’m doing. These are the people I’m involved with. I like the people. It’s a whole
different thing I’m doing here, and I think I’m doing the right thing, and I’m very interested
in what I’m doing. So, that’s another thing. It’s getting drugs for people, and also, the whole
idea of interacting. I was always a laboratory person, and now, interacting with people, it was
completely different and something I had never done before. I was not a joiner before, at all.
But, I was a fighter type person, that would fight for somebody’s rights. What happened to you
when people started to die – your friends? Well, it was very hard on everyone – myself, the
group. There were funerals, meetings, memorial meetings for people, and it was very moving, to
see all the people that came. Did you have any particularly close friends, whose deaths you
recall? Well, one – I can’t remember his first name. His name was Bohn. He was a Quaker, and
then another woman who died. From ACT UP? Yeah, I think it was ACT UP, because I did get
involved with some people – through someone in ACT UP, with a group of women in Brooklyn – it
was a help group for women with AIDS – making them trainers and so forth. So, yeah, it was very
moving, you know? To see people dying of this disease – knowing that they soon would not be
here. There were a lot of people like that. You were the founder, I believe, of the AIDS
Treatment Data Network? Treatment Network. It was called ATR – AIDS Treatment Registry, and then
the name changed a number of times. Then, it went AIDS Treatment Resources or something – AIDS
Treatment. What was the need that that responded to? Well, you didn’t know where the trials
were. I mean, my working with this one woman – the one woman who affected me, was this woman
with ALS, and attempting to find the drugs. Now, in that disease – there’s no drugs for this
disease. I even doubt if there are any drugs now. They were using cyclosporin or something. She
went to Germany – she was German – there was nothing there. She came back and died shortly
after. But, I know that this was an area that was not properly covered. The hospitals do not –
or, the doctors do not get information about clinical trials out to people. And, there was a
barrier, it seemed. You couldn’t give medical information, if you weren’t a doctor. There was
all this stuff that you couldn’t do. So, you mean, individual hospitals would just be
constructing their own trials, and nobody would know what anyone else was doing? Well, it was
another system that was set up – that didn’t work very well. It had to do with the doctors – the
doctors in certain fields, whether they were in cancer or whatever. And, they would have to be
research doctors. They would have to have certain qualifications and fill out the forms – the
FDA forms, to be a principle investigator. Then, there were the drug companies involved with
these doctors, too. If it was a drug company trial, there were payments made for these things.
And they seemed to like to be under the covers. Why? One can imagine that they felt comfortable
with that system. They were getting paid in some way, shape or form. And, they didn’t want
people to understand what was going on. It seems like this is what was going on. So, it was very
easy to say, well, okay. I started to look at cancer trials, just to see what kind of data base
there was – a government data base. And, I did find some stuff. But, I didn’t think it was very
good or up to date or anything. It was very hard to get. So we said, well you have to have this
type of information. This is crazy – keeping information from people, about where the drugs are
being tested. That was the idea, it took off. Everybody was working on this – Bob Huff,
everybody. We had meetings – that was another meeting – that was not Treatment and Data. And, it
actually became overpowering, because the amount of work you had to do on this thing – How many
clinical trials were there at a given time, that you would track? Like, in an issue of ATR or
whatever? Well, we got more and more, as the years went by. The first one – maybe there were 30,
40 or so, in the first book. One of the first books was in 1990. Then, it became more about
pushing them. We got more trials. We were getting more trials. More drugs were being tested.
When we pushed and finally got the ACTG, the AIDS Clinical Trial Group going, they were doing
more trials, also. And then, we found out, it was very hard to get drug company trials, because
that was more secret, because of all these payments probably going by, to the doctors. And
finding – we were contacting each of the hospitals that were doing these trials, and you had to
find the key person that would tell you what was going on there, in trials for AIDS. And, it was
usually the same people that were doing the ACTG trials, actually. Some hospitals that are not
ACTG sites – you had to make contact with the AIDS doctor there, and find out what the trials
were. Or some coordinator. So, if you started out with 40 or 50 in 1990, what did you have by –
I don’t know. I don’t know when I left ATR, but there were 60 or 70 trials. And how often would
ATR come out? Initially, it came out – I don’t know if it was every quarter or whatever. We came
out more often, and then we cut down because it was very intense. I didn’t like the fact that it
was cut down. Nowadays, you can have it on the net, but we had to have hard copy, and it was
very difficult. So, like, every three months, you’re coming out with a list of 60 or 70 trials.
And, how extensive were the descriptions? Did you evaluate the trials? Or, did you just try to
say what they were? No. All we did was give the entry criteria – for people who could get into
it – blood work they had to have, and the sites where the trials were going on. So, this
revolutionized AIDS research, because it democratized access to the trials – or at least
information. So, ACT UP was running this also? Yeah. ACT UP was a nucleus of this happening, and
it gathered the people who were going to work on this project. This became more intense I had to
leave ACT UP somewhat – I had to leave Treatment and Data and only do this, because it was so
intense. You left Treatment and Data to do the ATR? Yes. Do you know what year that was? I can’t
remember. Maybe it was ’93, or ’94. No – it was before that. Probably, it was about ’90 –
probably when the first directories came out. In 1990. And, how much longer did you stay in ACT
UP after that? Well, I continued to go to ACT UP. Do you continue to go now? No, I don’t. You
continued until when? Well, I sort of – I don’t know how many years – it was about 1996 or ’97.
So, you spent about 10 years in ACT UP? Right. 10 years, definitely 10 years. Okay, so you left
T&D and you went to the ATR, around 1990. And then, you work on that for a few years. Right.
And, that was your major focus in ACT UP? Right. Did you work on anything else, later, in ACT
UP? Or, did you stay with the Registry? I pretty much stayed with the Registry. But, I was
involved. I went to the meetings and stuff, and was still involved. Can you describe, a little
bit, how the introduction of the protease inhibitors or the ideas about the protease inhibitors
– how they were received in ACT UP? And, when people first became aware of this direction?
Protease – yeah. I remember the first protease, which was a very small trial in Boston or
somewhere. It was – essentially, it didn’t really give very much. I don’t know what protease it
was, but it wasn’t that successful. But, I can remember that there was this small trial. I don’t
know – it may have been at Johns Hopkins or somewhere, and everyone wanted to get in it. It
maybe had 10 spaces. And, any new drug was really sought after, and people wanted to try it, get
into the trial, whatever. And, that was, I would say, the beginning – that small trial of a few
people. And, the protease probably is not around anymore. That was the model, and that’s what I
remember was the first protease. And, of course, that was on Treatment and Data’s agenda – was
the protease inhibitors, after that. When did you start to think that this could really be a
turnaround direction? Well, with the protease inhibitors, it just seemed to fall into place, all
these things. This company makes it, that company made it; some other company made one. And, it
just fell into place. And then, the nucleosides are still there, having cocktails. So, it’s the
better use of the drugs – finding better ways to deliver what the dose should be. And, of
course, measuring the viral load. Those are all the things that made sense with the drugs –
reducing the side effects. Were you involved with the campaign to change the CDC definition of
AIDS? Yeah. Can you describe, a little bit, what that situation was? Well, I can remember going
down to the CDC – a rainy day, whatever it was, raining buckets – and changing the definition.
And, one of the things that I helped to change there was getting TB as an opportunistic
infection, I guess it was. And, the women’s issues that were there, also. And I was always
interested in the women’s issues – the access to women in the clinical trials. How were women
excluded from clinical trials? Well, they were excluded by the rules of the FDA, again. And the
doctors – the research doctors. I can remember – this was before I even came here – this one
doctor, when they treated rats, they only wanted male rats or something. So, it was very
ingrown, with respect to – they felt that women’s bodies would affect the results in some way
that they didn’t want because of the hormone cycles and everything – that they would affect
these drug cycles and stuff. Like, no one else had these problems of hormonal things going on.
And it was really that vulgar? Those were the reasons why women were excluded from the trials?
Well, they didn’t say it like that, but that was the rationale they talked amongst themselves,
I’m sure. So, how did that get that changed? Well, Terry McGovern – and there were law suits
against this. I can remember being called about women not being – one of the drugs, Ampligen,
didn’t work very well, wasn’t a good drug, but the woman wanted to get into the trial, and
couldn’t get into it. And, Terry McGovern sought these people out, and she worked as an advocate
for these people. So, why did you finally leave ACT UP after 10 years? You have to move on.
First of all, I did the AIDS Clinical Trial Group. I thought that was very important, to have a
good Community Advisory Board – CAB, as they called it. And, I was always associated with Mt.
Sinai, and I thought the CAB wasn’t going anywhere, so I thought I would take it over, and I
became the Chair there. So, it was quite a bit of work, actually. What were some of the projects
that you did there? Well, the whole idea was how you have a meeting every month and how you find
out what’s going on, and also – you have to run – this is supposed to be a Board, and there’s
supposed to be certain information given. Now, the investigator sometimes wants to give you his
information. He’ll talk about – not AIDS clinical trial, not the government trials, but some
other trial he wants to do. So, there’s a problem in what type of information, and also, how you
train people, how the whole organization works and what influence you have at the national
level. So, that took up a lot of time, figuring out that, and trying to – the CCG – the
Community – do you know what it is? The CCG – it’s like the CAB on a national level – Community
Constituency Group – that’s what it is. And, it’s supposed to be made up of representatives from
the CABs and stuff, but that never really happened exactly that way. People may come from other
areas. And so, there’s somewhat of a disconnect that I felt was a disconnect, between the CCG
and the CABs. And, there’s a lot of issues – getting more members to CABs, and getting them to
meetings and all these things. And, I tried to work in that area. I tried to drum up more
activism in the CABs and help them get to meetings. Who was in the Sinai CAB? Who were some of
the other people? There was Holly Horn of ACT UP, and David – I can’t remember their names.
David Gold? No. David Barr? No. I can’t remember right now. I have a whole list upstairs, if you
need to know – Sandy Baker, who was a patient at Mt. Sinai. I built it up pretty good. Finally,
there was even the woman who’s now in the CCG. What’s her name? Ann something. She works for the
city. She’s a nurse, and she worked for GMHC, also. Holly acted as the Vice President and
Secretary, and I was the Chair, and we had minutes at every meeting. I think they were too long,
at this point, now, from what I know about minutes. But, we tried to record everything that was
said at the meeting and we had good discussions. I was the Chair for two years there, and before
that time, I was also involved – there was a man who had HIV, and he was a Chair. I just acted
as a Secretary at that time, but I was sort of doing the work. He was not too well. And, I
thought we built it up pretty good. We had regular meetings. There was never a meeting missed.
Now, when TAG separated from ACT UP, why did you stay with ACT UP? Or, did you also go to TAG?
No. I never went to a TAG meeting. Why was that? I don’t know. I just felt – I didn’t feel –
there was some sort of animosity between certain ACT UP people and TAG. I wanted to go, but I
never pushed myself to go. Were you ever in direct conflict with them? No, not exactly. Meetings
are a dynamic. And, you can either feel wanted at a meeting or you don’t. And, I felt that some
of the meetings, later on, were not very friendly. In fact, I saw one woman, who was a friend of
mine – she was trashed. This had to do with peptide-T, and she was at the meeting and really
made to feel not very welcome. So, I wasn’t comfortable with TAG. And, there were other people,
also, that were not comfortable with TAG. Right, so you stayed in ACT UP? Yeah, I stayed in ACT
UP. The people are fine – Gonsalves and whatever, the others. But, there was a little
ruthlessness. I don’t know what it was, there was something that was not just right.
