So when we interviewed Marlene McCarty, she had so many interesting things to say, and it was
really an exciting interview. But one of her observations was that using graphics that referred
to advertising was far more effective at the beginning of ACT UP, because the message was
simpler. But as the message became more complex, she learned that advertising cannot convey a
complex message. And I’m wondering if you have an idea, sort of a narrative arc, about the
evolution of graphics in ACT UP in relation to the evolution of the crisis, beyond the period of
AIDS Demo Graphics. Beyond the period of – Yeah. Because that was still at the height of the
movement, when you published that book. Yeah, but it’s hard for me to think of, actually.
Because that ended with Stop the Church. So I actually can’t, apart from – what was it? Where
did we demonstrate that was not the FDA that was in Bethesda? The NIH? The NIH. The CDC; the
NIH. Apart from that demonstration, I can’t really even recall graphics. Oh, okay. So you ceased
to follow them, in a sense, after that – as closely, would you say? Yes, I certainly did. I
guess – this is just a question of memory, sorry. But it’s just a question of where I sort of
locate the end of, I mean, that’s crazy. Because obviously, Stop the Church, we were still at
the Center. So it doesn’t even include the entire time that we were at Cooper, where I certainly
continued to go to meetings. But I don’t, it’s funny. I guess this is a question of just my own
self-involvement. But I don’t remember graphics beyond that. Well, as we started to get into
issues of women with AIDS; and there was like, you know, “Women don’t get AIDS, they just die
from it”; those kinds of slogans – Right. – and housing issues, and needle exchange – Right. –
it started to be more difficult – Yeah. – to convey – Everything became more difficult. I don’t
think it’s a question of just graphics. I mean, for me, it was a question — once the
organization began to, let’s say, to take on the structural questions that AIDS only magnified,
then everything became way more complex; and, I think, intractable, in some ways. Or let’s say
it was more despairing, because you couldn’t – you could change – I heard recently a broadcast,
on NPR, about the drug approval process now. And suddenly, I heard Gregg Bordowitz’s voice,
archival footage from the FDA demonstration. He was in an ACT UP, saying, 10 more days before we
take over the FDA. And so there were places where we could really see change. Particularly in
relation to how AIDS was talked about in mainstream press, for example. I think we really did
have an effect on that. But changing poverty is like a whole other ballgame. And it seemed to me
that that was, it was not only a question of the greater nuance that you needed to talk about
certain kinds of issues. But just the more we came to understand the depth of the problems in
this society with regard to healthcare; with regard to class; with regard to race; as they
intersected with AIDS, the harder it became for us, I think, to take them on; and the more
despairing it became. So you’re saying, then, that, like, the class divide is stronger than HIV?
No, I’m saying that, what I think I’m saying is that there was perhaps a period of time, between
the founding of ACT UP and, say, 1990, ’91, that we could just suspend thinking about the huge
complexity of the problems of this society, and think more myopically about the urgencies of
what we were confronting with regard to things like the drug approval process, or the fact that
the president hadn’t said the word “AIDS.” One of the things that I’ve always disagreed with
Larry Kramer about is that he tends to demonize particular people — or did — with regard to AIDS
issues; particularly government officials, who he considered our enemy. And the focus that that
gave us; the fact that we could say, so-and-so is a bad guy. Stephen Joseph, health commissioner
of New York City, is a bad guy; Ed Koch, Mayor of New York City, is a bad guy, because they’re
doing the wrong thing with regard to AIDS. That was a lot easier to do than to take on
structural inequality, the larger, more complex analysis of politics. Wanting to kind of give a
face to evil is something that governs a lot of political thought in this country in ways that
are an effacement of structural questions. So I think we allowed ourselves to do that for a
period of time; to simplify things in order to attack them; and that it worked. But I think that
that has a limited life span. So that was part of it. I think that – But also, poverty wasn’t
the dominant issue in the lives of many of the people in leadership in ACT UP. Of course. So it
didn’t seem integrated. But if you look at it from the point of view of people for whom that’s
integrated, it’s a different kind of task, don’t you think? Indeed. Sure. Of course it is, yeah.
It’s a perspective problem – Yeah, yeah, yeah. Because I mean, postmodernism addresses the
problem of explaining things or addressing things that cannot be summed up. That’s right, that’s
right. Of course. So if you can only agitate around things that can be summed up, you can’t
create change. That’s right. Well – yeah. I think that that’s, I think that eventually you have
to be able to figure out, I mean, maybe that question actually makes me want to revise what I
said to you – Okay. – a little bit. Because I think that maybe one of the great things that ACT
UP was able to do was to figure out ways of putting a certain complexity into sloganeering.
Silence Equals Death is an extremely vague, and at the same time, extremely resonant image text,
that, I mean, the way I wrote about it in AIDS Demo Graphics was that it was partly because one
doesn’t necessarily immediately know what it means; what that pink triangle is, for example; why
it’s upside down, in relation to the way it was historically used; how it was historically used.
That’s not all right there. And yet, it became incredibly resonant for that very reason. So I
think that there are ways, graphically and textually, to constitute a certain complexity. And I
think that that was one of the achievements of the graphic and other representational work that
ACT UP did. The invention of slogans; certainly the Fact Sheets, the way the Fact Sheets were
broken down, and so on. But I guess maybe I still think that there is a certain limit to how far
that can go. But that kind of activist work — that on-the-street, chanting, sloganeering
demonstration — is, as we know, only one of the many, many, many things that ACT UP did. Yes. So
we weren’t limited just to that; I mean, to the kind of reduction of things into a chant or a
slogan or a sound bite. But that was our marketing. Yeah. That was our marketing. That we were
able to do that. You mean that we were able to – That’s how we recruited and that’s how we –
Yeah, yes. – branded ourselves. Yes, I think that’s true. And I think that the innovation there,
there were several innovations. One of them was the professionalism of the graphic work; I mean
the fact that it actually looked truly mass produced; that it looked like we were, I mean, I
think when ACT UP first went to the gay rights march in Washington, which was in ’87, I believe
— ’88, ’87 – I don’t know. – and everyone had the same T-shirts; that the group looked
incredibly well organized; incredibly together. And it was just a question of T-shirts, which
are pretty easy to get made. So it was partly savvy. The question that you’re asking me about
the issues that both were and became obvious to us as more complex also has to do with a
different set of questions that I tried to take on a bit with regard to questions of ambivalence
and of mourning; questions that Gregg Bordowitz took on really, really beautifully in Fast Trip,
Long Drop. Which, in some ways, was a critical work, a critical video, about the rhetorics, the
early rhetorics used in ACT UP. It was a self-critical look at, or a self-reflexive look, at
earlier moments of activism. I said before that I felt a certain – distance from the
organization from the time that I went. I didn’t feel fully a participant, although I was very,
I always went. And it was partly a question, I think, of my age. But I think it was also a
question of a certain shyness and a sense of awkwardness in a group situation that I’ve always
felt. The idea of, I don’t know, having a microphone thrust in my face during a demonstration
always terrified me. This was captured, this feeling — it’s one of the reasons I love this video
called Marta, by Matt Ebert and Ryan Landry. I don’t know if you know that, but – Jim knows it.
Ryan plays, in drag, a kind of young girl who comes to ACT UP. And it’s all about the sort of
awkwardness of not being able to choose which poster you’re going to carry at the demonstration,
and everything she does is a little awkward and a little weird. And for me, it exactly captures
the way I felt in being an activist. It doesn’t feel in any way natural to me. And I came to
realize that that was one of the things that I loved about ACT UP; was that it so often undercut
or punctured or criticized the kind of heroics of activism, even as it also enacted it; the kind
of, the macho character of activism. And I think that you need that, you need a self-assurance,
you need to believe that you’re right when you’re shouting something on the street. But you also
need to be self-reflexive about that, and to recognize ambivalences and complexities and
sadnesses and – you have to recognize, at the same time as you are saying “AIDS is not a death
sentence,” that at that time, AIDS was a death sentence. Although many of those people didn’t
die. They didn’t die, no. No. But they, they knew that it was likely that they would. Right. And
we knew it was likely that they would. And many of them did. Right. And that was the reality
that we were both grappling with and dealing with on a daily basis, and disavowing on a daily
basis. So I think that that ambivalence, that sort of recognition/disavowal thing that was
necessary to us – if it tilted in one direction or the other, it didn’t work. It very rarely
tilted in the direction of being just about sadness, let’s say; except for those people who just
stopped coming, couldn’t handle it anymore. But the way in which the heroics got punctured by
Rollerina in drag, on the floor; or various jokes that were made, that sort of punctured the
kind of inflated rhetoric and so on; that’s what made those meetings pleasurable to me. I think
that I’m temperamentally just so put off by certainty, by political certainty. For me, the kind
of moral certainty of George Bush is the most terrifying thing about him. And when I see it
reproduced from the left, I’m, maybe not equally, but I am also put off by it. Right. Although
one has a state apparatus, and the other has no apparatus. Right, right.
