So how did the whole Wall Street action come to be? Well, I think that Larry was really pushing
for it. It was about the price of AZT, and Larry had a boner for AZT and all of the questions
surrounding it. Well, not all of the questions, not the toxicity, not the failed cancer drug
part of it, just the “We need it. You’re keeping us from it” part. It seemed like a good place
to start, and I don’t think there was any disagreement about it. Had you ever done an action
before? ACT UP? You personally? Many times. Yeah. I worked with the Student Mobilization
Committee. I was in the Poor People’s Campaign. You’d been arrested? Yeah. Did they do any kind
of training? Because I’m sure a lot of - No. There was no martial training. No. So how did they
get the word out on the action? It was the room, I think. There was no phone tree yet. Well,
there was a phone tree. Actually, under my bed I started the phone tree. I have the original
-There were no computers. Back then before cell phones and they had these things called streets
and Letraset, and I actually Letrasetted the phone tree page and have all these kind of blurred
ink names on them. So I think we called everyone on the phone tree, and then it was the room,
and I think that was it. Plus it actually did start as a coalition and there were members from
other groups. Now, whether or not GMHC people came, I couldn’t tell you. But, truthfully, it
wasn’t that big of a demonstration. How many people, would you say? Well, I would say if it was
two hundred people, that was a lot. It was not that big. It was on that stretch of Lower
Broadway right by the church, and how many people could actually be there? You know what I mean?
There was the effigy. Larry made such a thing about Joe Papp’s Prop Shop doing an effigy of
Frank Young, and it was rather tawdry, and it seemed kind of anachronistic, the idea of hanging
someone in effigy who, in particular, was deeply involved in the pharmaceutical industrial
complex. It was weird. I think like he brought it or had someone bring it, but nobody knew he
was doing it, and everyone then was involved with having to figure out how to hoist it. It was a
whole thing. It was a whole moment. But I do remember the post that we hung it from was just
slightly north of the church, so that was, in some way, the center of the demonstration, and it
didn’t go that far north or south from the intersection, which is where we sat to block. A lot
of the people there were cops. Not a lot, but there were cops, so that inflated the numbers. I
think my estimate would be two hundred people, tops. I’m not really sure about that, but that
would be my estimate. So what were some of the early analytical directions for ACT UP or some of
the goals that were set or brought up? Well, again, I think that in the mythos surrounding ACT
UP, certain things that were said about it started to become true, like in the way that the
Right Wing creates things by saying it, whether they’re true or not. But there were certain
realities that would be easy to forget. There were issues about communities of color. There were
issues about women. They were brought up; they were not resolved. They weren’t universally
agreed on. But there was a lot more that happened later that actually was on the table from the
beginning. There were fights about it. There were disagreements. There was pain surrounding a
lot of these issues. I think that the strategy that won out, as in any collective environment,
there is a hierarchy. In this particular case, it was a hierarchy of urgency, and I think almost
everything was made in deference to the dying, the sick or the dying. So the arguments that were
most compelling were the ones that seemed time-sensitive, and they were the ones related to drug
therapies. Ancillary to that were questions of access, but they came later in ACT UP when people
who were accustomed to organizing realized that you couldn’t have the one without the other. It
was the myopia of ACT UP to buy into the idea that if we could just get them to release the
drugs, everything would be okay. There were people who thought that, and it was myopic. That was
true, but it was myopic because there’s much more to it than that. Right. Now, were you involved
with Steve at this time, I think? Steve Webb? Yeah. Yeah. Before ACT UP started? No. You met in
ACT UP, right? We met through ACT UP. So if you met your boyfriend in ACT UP and then you were
going to ACT UP and your artistic collaborators were in ACT UP, it probably was a huge part of
your week. Huge. Every moment from the second ACT UP started until I completely burned out and
left New York City was completely, as many of us were, absorbed. What happened to the rest of
your life, your other relationships, your job? I had no relationships that weren’t involved in
this issue, and even the ones on the furthest periphery of the gravitational pull of it, the
centrifugal force of it, were involved in it. There was no one who wasn’t touched by it. But I
think that I compartmentalized things. I’m certain of it, because there were a couple of things
I was famously dogmatic about, and one of them was not having it be about my personal journey
with AIDS, because people’s lives were in danger. And while I felt like it was germane, it was
germane to me and people who knew me, and not really germane to the conversation. I realize in
hindsight that that was a tremendous mistake on my part, and there’s probably a separate ring in
hell for me because of that. Why do you - What? I’m trying to figure out how to say this,
because I’m trying to say five things at once. One of the things I’m famously dogmatic about is
history, and, in fact, as you know more than anyone, it’s taken me a long time to agree to do
this because I’m very ambivalent about history on many, many levels, who writes it, who gets to
hear it, how it’s revised, who owns the stories, who tells the stories, who hears them, and in
particular with regards to AIDS, we were sucked into another entropy which was the art world,
and it had its own gravitational pull, and its pull is towards cultural analysis and cultural
participation. And I was adamant about not getting sucked into that, because people were dying.
You remember what it was like. Care teams; hospital visits; funerals; finding places for
people’s possessions; fighting with people’s families over what they wanted; people’s boyfriends
who were thrown out on the street. It was a war, and I felt really squeamish about it. Well, I
wasn’t squeamish about it. I was adamant about it, dogmatic about it, and I got into a lot of
fights with people who didn’t deserve it because they were, frankly, people who agreed with me
on it, but in the collective work that I ended up doing that related to the art world, I was
very dogmatic about it, and I felt like creating history while you’re living it is a way that we
neutralize what’s happening. You’re creating an arm’s distance at the same time that it’s
happening. It’s like a man living his life as a life remembered. You’re not actually living it;
you’re remembering it while you’re living it. I felt like the issue couldn’t be supplanted by
all the other questions. It would be very easy to have it be cannibalized by how cool it looked,
by how savvy we were, all of that. We were clever. We were cool. It was savvy. But I wasn’t
setting out to make art, and I was very dogmatic about it, very unattractively dogmatic about
it. Okay, we’ll get to that in a minute, because I want to bring that up again. So ACT UP is
beginning, and where did you first fit in or plug in? What kind of work did you do? Well, I’m
not a person who flings myself into the middle of things. I’m one of those people who, if you
had to choose between being rich or being famous, I would choose being rich. It’s never a choice
that’s been offered to me, by the way. Notoriety, fame is not my thing. There are people who
think that’s incredibly coy, hearing me say that and disagree with that, because I have been in
the center of things, but I didn’t really expect to be or choose to be in any way a central
player in ACT UP. I really just was there to listen, but occasionally did speak up and also
notorious for being bombastic and lapsing into manifesto and public displays of hostility, and I
think I attracted some attention and was on the Coordinating Committee, voted to be on the
Coordinating Committee. Can you explain what that was? I can, yes, and, in fact, if I ever found
my notebook, there are notes from those meetings. Originally, the Coordinating Committee was
meant to just do that, to create the agenda, to figure out what the various needs of the
subcommittees were, and at the time it was logistics, action, fundraising, outreach. I may be
missing one. So it was to prioritize and strategize about how the next meeting would go and then
to bring things to the floor. But of course in a free-wheeling democratic context, which is what
ACT UP was, participatory democracy, there was some tension about whether it was necessary and
who it was, and we used to joke about being the power clique, because, really, that’s all we
did. But I think from the outside it might have seemed different. Nesline loves to repeat the
story—he’s told it to me a hundred times—of Larry coming to the Coordinating Committee—sorry,
Larry—to ask us to stage a coup, sort of, that we should take power, that there needed to be
leadership and we were the ones who would naturally be poised to do it and we should just steer
the group, and we were like— What was upsetting him? Well, I don’t know. Larry is
leadership-obsessed. He comes from an orientation where leadership is hierarchical. That’s not
my orientation. Who were the other people on the Coordinating Committee? Nesline; Steve Webb;
Brad Ball; Mike Savino. Staley was there for a while. Jerry Smith. I might be leaving one person
out, but I think that was it. It was a small group. Then where did you go from there? Well,
there was only a Coordinating Committee for a very small period of time, because, again, in the
beginning it was a coalition, and this was the orientation of other groups who had experience
with it, they needed some sort of Coordinating Committee, so it was created. It was the will of
the floor, such as it was, but I don’t think anyone knew whether they thought it was a good idea
or not. Someone proposed it, and it seemed okay and it happened. But it very soon seemed obvious
to us that it was completely unnecessary, that the business of the floor was being done on the
floor and done very well, and there was no need for us to go in there and tinker with it. It was
very linear and clear what the floor wanted, and there was no reason that they should be told
anything, and if there were, we were not the people to tell it. In fact, Steve came up with the
idea of the organizing principles, and we spent some time writing that as a way of capping the
existence of the Coordinating Committee, which is eventually what happened, the Working
Document. And what were the organizing - Deb Levine actually has a copy of it, and I probably
do, but I don’t know where it is. But I sat on the bed as Steve worked on it every night, and he
worked really hard on it and fully considered, in a way that surprised me, because I wouldn’t
say that I - I’m going to give an aside which you may want to come back to. I wouldn’t say that
people were uniformly politicized in the same way in ACT UP. It was a process of politicization
and there were a lot of people who were not politicized before AIDS or before they entered that
room. So it was very tiered, the level of political consciousness, and I wouldn’t say that Steve
came from a political orientation, but he was so considered that he really managed to construct
almost like a constitution, so broad, so universal, so completely considerate of all of the
potential pitfalls, but also specific enough that it would really empower the room, and that was
what it was. That was how it was written and that’s how it was presented to the floor. There may
have been modifications, and it was adopted and then completely disregarded because it also
wasn’t necessary. But it was just a way of concretizing what was happening, which was the room
was leading itself, and that was the best thing about it. So then where did you start doing your
work after that? Well, I was very active in the Logistics Committee. Can you explain what that
was? The Logistics Committee was - And I also worked on the Actions Committee. The floor would
decide on actions. There would be a period of commentary at the beginning of the meeting where
people would propose actions, and they would then be later considered and prioritized, usually
at the moment on the room, but, if not, it would go back to the committee and they would then
prioritize things by time sensitivity or opportunities that might be presenting themselves. So
the Action Committee sort of digested that part of it, and that’s part of what the Action
Committee did was to do the research, to figure out what the best time and place would be, who
was going to be there, what possible strategies might be to take back to the floor. The
Logistics Committee was folded into the Action Committee at some point because it was
duplicative, but the logistics were how many buses would we need; where would we get the flyers;
who would write them; who would pay for it; do we need rooms? We would scope out the physical
plant, take videos, so people would know what the entrances and exits to the building would be,
if it was guarded, when it was open, if you needed a pass to get in, if we had a friend on the
inside. That was what the Logistics was, and I loved doing stuff like that. What were some of
the actions that you were involved in on the Actions Committee? Well, I think, again, it was
quickly disbanded, and I think we worked for a fair amount on the march on Washington, and, in
fact, I went as a representative of ACT UP to the Boston meetings that led to the march on
Washington. So how was ACT UP received by the other organizations? Badly. What did they think?
Brad Ball used to say—and I think it’s dismissive, but it’s too funny not to say—that we were an
unruly middle-class mob. That completely neutralizes the fact that we weren’t all middle-class,
but it was true that we were an unruly mob, and we got into a lot of fights with party hacks. We
broke into meetings of lesbian and gay groups to insist that they take our issue. At the March
on Washington meeting in Boston, I was asked not to speak by the first half of the first day. It
was so hostile. I remember I said something like that we were talking about the actions on the
Supreme Court steps, and they were talking about the waves and the agitprop and the safe zone,
and it was a whole peace and freedom bent to it, coalition style of organizing. And I said,
“While you’re dancing around down there with your puppets, people are going to be getting
arrested over here.” And it was like that kind of hostility that barred me from speaking. So
really, really honestly and in retrospect, why do you think that so much of the gay community
was so hostile to what we were doing? Well, I think that’s a very good question. It seemed very
apparent at the time, but in hindsight, I’m not sure how to characterize it. I believe that
there was an insider mentality to a lot of lesbian and gay organizing in New York City at the
time, and we were not playing that game; we were interfering with it. I think also you have to
remember that while everyone knew about AIDS in the lesbian and gay community, there was a broad
diversity of responses to it. I remember when I wore a Silence = Death button to dinner one
night, and the waiter, as he came to the table, he said, “That’s a very violent button.” And I
said, “These are very violent times.” But I was really surprised that a gay man should look at
that and be upset by it or offended by it, but people were. People had different responses. Do
you have any sense of why? Yeah, of course I do. I don’t know if they’re accurate. I think that
people have a tendency — I think gay men in particular have a tendency towards compliance and
self-oppression. I know that that’s a very broad stroke and it’s much more complicated than
that, but I think that was what was at work there. I think that there were people who were
struggling to hold AIDS at arm’s distance. I think it was violent. I think we were very hostile
and there are a lot of people who have issues with that. And I think that the reason why it
became easy for ACT UP to be my every waking moment was I was in a community for probably the
first time in my life where I wasn’t the most hostile person in the room. When Don died, you had
almost no support system. I mean, you had the Dione brothers, but you were living in silence.
When Steve died, it was a very different kind of - Mm-hmm. So you had built a community for
yourself in those interim — Well, that was pretty early days. That was the first year, within
the first year. Not even; it was nine months after ACT UP formed. There was a certain mythology
around Steve and probably another one around the two of us as a couple, and it was a suicide,
and suicide is irreconcilable. All death is, in my estimation, but you can’t make sense of it.
No sense can be made. I will tell one story, and it’s only because you’ve asked me personally
what I thought. This is going to sound like a critique, but I don’t really mean it as one. I
went to Steve’s memorial service, out to his family, to bury him. In fact, one of the original
sketches of the Silence = Death poster, I put it in his coffin. Then I felt like that was a
service for people who had no idea who he was. They were entitled to it, but here’s the thing
that I am quite sure of. You know the cliche about weddings and funerals, it’s, of course, true,
but what really is happening surrounding a death is people are vying for ownership of the dead
and the death. Your sense of the deceased can be a challenge to somebody else’s, and, in fact,
that’s the strife that people refer to when they talk about the camps that form surrounding
death. So Steve’s family was having one set of realities surrounding him, and they were parts of
his life that I only knew through him, and I believe them to be true because I believed he knew
who he was. But it wasn’t who I thought he was and who people who were gay thought he was and
who knew him through the various levels of his life as a gay man. So I decided we needed a
memorial in New York, and I assembled one with Maria Maggenti’s help at the Center. As I said,
because I, again, I didn’t invent this, but because I was raised in a town which had a Quaker
meetinghouse, the way the Quaker meetings work is that there is no leader. People speak when
they feel they have something to say, and everyone, anyone, can talk, and that’s how I felt this
memorial should be. It’s how I think a memorial should be, so that people are not - their own
memory of the dead is not threatened by somebody else’s memory of the dead. I don’t believe in a
preacher. But I did write a eulogy. In fact, I wrote it on Larry’s computer. I’m very
embarrassed to say that I actually told his story as I saw it, and it was very bombastic. It was
embarrassingly candid. It was very excessive. But I really felt like it was important to do, and
I did, and I told the story of his terrible, sad life, of his life as a call boy, all of it, his
drug history, his being abused by his coach. Well, not abused; he was having sex with him. But
he was an older man and, p.s., the close friend of his father. His father disowned him over it,
even though it was consensual. All of that stuff, the terror of it. But I felt like it was his
story, and this was our memorial and it should be true to our experience of it. It didn’t have
to be this or that, and I felt like it needed to be honest, and I did tell the story. I’m
embarrassed to say that I did, but I did. After this humiliatingly candid, probably diatribe, I
then invited everyone else who was there - There weren’t a lot of people. It was in one of the
smaller rooms up those really weird stairs on the southeastern corner of the building. Maybe
there were twenty-five or thirty people there. I said, “So I wanted you to all now if anyone has
anything they want to share about Steve, please feel free to.” The first person who stood up,
I’d just talked about how difficult it was for Steve, how he navigated through the world through
his physicality, that it was his way of negotiating worth, and that being a sex worker is far
more complicated than liking sex or needing money. There are other things at work, and I mapped
some of that out. The first person who stood up, talked about “I remember him on Fire Island,
the first time I saw him and how he looked in a bathing suit,” and then it devolved from there.
That is what people - That’s how they saw him. Part of his what led him to suicide was being
seen that way, and I was trying to shift the dynamic of it and wasn’t able to, and felt so
incredibly alienated that I left town and didn’t come back for a week. I remember you getting
really upset at a meeting right after he died and yelling about something, and I remembered how
everyone respected it. In a normal environment, if someone acted out like that, everybody would
shun them, but in that environment, it was completely reasonable and people just went on to the
next thing. Yeah. I think when we were talking at Harvard and Joy Episalla was doing her panel
on the funeral, I had spoken on another panel, and somebody who wasn’t at the funerals had
discovered the tape, and she was doing the presentation about public performance of political
questions. She showed the tape, and so I’d been thinking a lot about political funerals before
that. But I do think that in there is the core of what you’ve just said. I remember because it
was the Marys who were conducting the Wojnarowicz funeral that was at question at this other
panel, and it was the first time I had seen tapes of it since being there, but it was as fresh
as the day it happened. I remember the feeling of watching it so dangerously spinning out of
control because it was primeval, what was happening. It was prehistoric, the public mourning
that we experienced that day, but, in truth, every day, all of us. And it was in the room and it
was there at those funerals. I remember thinking, as people were building bonfire of the
posters, and I don’t know if you recall, but the first - I don’t know if it was the first Queer
Nation march, but we snaked through the Village, and during that march we went through certain
parts of the Village that were hostile. Somebody pulled a gun, Broadway near Astor Place. One of
us or somebody on the street? No, somebody pulled a gun on Signorile. Later somebody pulled a
machete near the basketball courts, Waverly Place. People were throwing bottles of milk out the
apartment windows. It was a different world, and we were in one of those abandoned chasms,
Lafayette near Crosby Street. It was very unsafe, and as somebody who martialed and did legal
support work and had martial training, I knew it was unsafe, but it couldn’t be stopped. It
shouldn’t be stopped. And it was so dangerously close to spinning out of control and being
unsafe, but it had to happen. I remember that — I don’t know how else to describe it. It was
opalescent on so many levels, the pain of it, the importance of it, the danger of it, the
sadness, the compulsion, the destructiveness of it, all at once, and feeling privileged and
scared, feeling obliged to let it happen and afraid of letting it happen. Nothing happened that
night, but the reason I brought up the other march is that things do happen, bad things can
happen in those situations on an abandoned street in the middle of the night with a body in a
casket and a bonfire on a deserted street in New York. But that was in the room. That was in the
room every week.
